What we're trying to do with this small short series of podcasts is to
Give the listener an idea about
Tiger Bay
Butetown
Cardiff docks and
The people the places and the culture that makes
That area so important in terms of Wales Cardiff and generally
We'd like to say thank you from us at HDA for Heritage Lottery for their support
That's enabled us to undertake this
these this work
This brief podcast is about an area within
Butetown
Mount Stewart
Mount Stewart Square
It's a residential and commercial square in Cardiff is located in the Butetown area of the city
Originally it was developed in the late
1800s as a residential location for nearby dock workers
But it quickly changed to a center for upscale residential properties
Which revolved around the main square?
By 1900 commercial activity had taken its place
dominated by the coal exchange which took a piece of land away from
Mount Stewart Square and
That because it occupied the once open central space
The square contains a high
concentration of listed buildings which represent a range of
Articulate our architectural styles and some of Cardiff's finest examples of the late
19th and early 20th century
commercial architecture
Mount Stewart Square area was designated a conservation area in July
The area which Mount Stewart currently occupies was originally coastal mudflat in its in its present form
It is an urban area bordered by the the road the a4 119
James Street a major road to the south
early 20th century search or social housing to the north and
On a site which had previously been used as a rail route rail yard
historic commercial properties to the west on West Bute Street and the historic
Glamorganshire Canal
to the east
the Glamorganshire Canal was drained in December 1951 when a
steam suction dredger crashed into the inner lock gates
Forcing them to collapse and all the water was released into the estuary
that actually resolved a problem for the council because
They didn't know what to do with it and it was too expensive to
to resolve its faults
Well, the gates were never repaired and for a number of years the canal remained dry
Until the land was filled in and converted to parkland
namely
Canal Park the square lies approximately half a mile to the south of Loudoun Square
Which was also built as a residential square, but never actually developed into a commercial hub
It junctions with James Street and West Bute Street
Provides vehicle access to the square and pedestrian access exists to the parkland to the west
The square has one-way traffic system which vehicles enter the junction with James Street
etc
Mount Stewart Square has a distinctive form with buildings on four sides facing the Cardiff Coal Exchange in the centre
It is not a square in the true sense
because the building there was limited by the physical restrictions of
the canal
Now Mount Stewart Square is closely linked to its its development is closely linked to that the coal industry in South Wales
the mining of coal in the South Wales valleys in the
1790s onward meant that card developed into a port through which the coal was shipped and exported worldwide
It was initially transported using the Glenorchinshire Canal and later by rail on the Taft Vale Railway
Both of which terminated close to the site of the square a number of docks were constructed to
Filosylate the movement of this coal and the entire Bute town area of Cardiff was transformed to accommodate the new industry
and by the 1830s
Cardiff became the preeminent iron exporting port
shipping almost half of Britain's overseas iron exports between
1840 and
1870 and
then coal began to dominate and
the population of the area increased accordingly and
The grid pattern residential suburb for port related workers was built on land which included the site of the square
Now Mount Stewart Square was constructed in
1855 as a very select resident residential enclave around ornamental gardens
merchants and sea captains and originally consisted of 45 stuccoed three-story townhouses
The land was originally mud fat, but later the Cardiff glassworks had partly occupied the area as
A result the underlying soil was a mixture of mud and slag from the glass which
Which required 30 feet of concrete shafts to be constructed
That rested on a bed of hard gravel in order to construct the foundations of the square
In the period immediately before construction of the square commenced the land was used as a stables for canal horses
Named after Lord Mount Stewart the area was the vision of the second Marquis
John Crichton Stewart
Second Marquis of Bute who wanted to create a grand Georgian space to rival
Barclay Square in London
The development of the square was part of his vision to transform
Cardiff into a major port
improve the value of his own lands in Cardiff itself and increase the value of the royalties he could charge on his coal fields
As the docks rose in prominent wealthy residents moved out and it became a commercial centre
the construction of the coal exchange building
Solidified the change in focus to commercial and it became central to the coal trade activity
the coal exchange area meant that
Those of the original townhouses not converted were replaced by purpose-built offices for coal and shipping agents
The
Building surrounded the coal exchange housed coal companies banks and agents
most of
Cardiff's notable architects of the period are represented
including Alexander roots
architect of the Bute state Edwin Seward EWM Corbett Percy Thomas and Henry Budging
The impact of World War one was significant on the square
Having a damaging effect on the coal industry
By 1921 only six of the 52 companies operating in 1898 were still in business
with the industry never recovering
The coal exchange closed
Which in reduced which in turn reduced the demand for commercial premises on the square and allowed boarding houses to be established
And by the early early 20th century all banks had vacated their properties on the square
The western side of the square saw a gradual demolition of original properties and by the
1990s was no longer enclosed on its border with a canal much of the land was being used at open-air car parks
Until the construction of st. James and st. Stephen's mansions which once again enclosed the square
Mount Stewart Square has been home to a number of religious buildings in addition to its function as a
residential and commercial space the only remaining building st. Stephen's Church
designed by architect E.M. Bruce Bourne and constructed between
1900 and 1902
It's located at the junction with West Bute Street
Designed in a gothic style the parish was deconsecrated in
between
2003 and 2009 the building was used as a live music as a live music venue called the Point
The Bethel English Baptist Church located near the South Summit entrance to the square was built in
1858 and renovated in
1898 and again in 1910 it was built in the classical and
Lombardic Italian style over two stories and was the location of Ivan Avello's baptism
the chapel closed in
1965 and the Casa Blanca Club operated from the site from 65 to 85 it was demolished in the
1990s
The Siloam West Baptist Chapel in the northeastern corner next to Lloyds Bank was opened in
1859 but in
1902 converting into a commercial building known as Phoenix House
Which retained the majority of the original building except the front wall
The Mount Stewart Welsh independent chapel now demolished was built in
1858 and rebuilt in
So that's a very brief history of Mount Stewart Square
Which has been many things but has always been pretty central
to
Cardiff Docks, the Tiger Bay and Bute Town and
Also, it's always been pretty elegant. It's just a personal opinion
But the Casa Blanca Club
Was pretty good place to go as well